Update support_08_preserve_publish.md (#138)
DHP-stottepakke/pages: pages/dmp_supporting_info/support_08_preserve_publish.md

## Question-specific guidance

### Can all of your data become completely open over time?

> As discussed above, research data should be made available, and preferably at an early stage, unless there are legal or ethical reasons for limiting the access. So, one of the first issues to clarify, is whether the data, all of it or part of it, can be made openly available, or if there need to be set an embargo period before opening access to the data. If no such legal or ethical considerations are valid, and if the data is background data for some publication, normally they should be made available no later than at the time of publishing the publication. But data that never was used as background data for publication(s) should also be archived as open as possible and as closed as necessary, and also as early as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As discussed above, research data should be made available, and preferably at an early stage, unless there are legal or ethical reasons for limiting the access. So, one of the first issues to clarify, is whether the data, all of it or part of it, can be made openly available, or if there need to be set an embargo period before opening access to the data. If no such legal or ethical considerations are valid, data should be archived as open as possible and as closed as necessary, and also as early as possible.\
If the data is background data for a scientific publication, normally it should be made available no later than at the time of publishing the article.
```

Timely archiving of datasets in [trustworthy repositories](/pages/support_08_preserve_publish#trustworthy-research-data-archives) is recommended. Depending on the study and the type of data, it may be appropriate to archive everything in one repository or archiving different parts in different repositories that will link to the related datasets. 

Evaluate which archive(s) will be most relevant for your datasets, using the following the decision tree:

    1) Does your dataset contain personal data or sensitive information?
    [If yes, investigate discipline-specific or generic archives with restricted access.]

    2) Do journals or funders require that specific archives will be used or is there disciplinary conventions regarding the choice of archive?
    [If yes, make yourself familiar with the recommendations and use discipline-specific archives.]

    3) Can you use an institutional archive?
    [If yes, use your institutional archive.]

    If none of the above applies, use a generic research data archive, or possibly a multi purpose archive accepting both data and other type of outputs.

In some cases it is important to contact the research data archive beforehand. 

> <!-- *elaborate*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> *make sure trustworthy repository is explained in terms and linked to* -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Generally, institutions and research funders set requirements to retain data for a given period. For example, the Research Council of Norway "has stipulated as a requirement that research data must be stored in a safe and secure manner for a minimum of 10 years" [(Policy for Open Science, 2020)](https://www.forskningsradet.no/siteassets/forskningspolitisk-radgivning/apen-forskning/nfr-policy-open-science-eng.pdf). On the other hand, the Research Council of Norway states that research projects "should explicitly address how research data that are not considered to have long-term value should be managed, or if relevant destroyed, after a certain period of time." [(Policy for for Open Access to Research
Data, 2017)](https://www.forskningsradet.no/contentassets/6ccb7b14c18a48ee974acd78fc64efba/the-research-council-of-norways-policy-for-open-access-to-research-data.pdf)

> So, it can be worthwhile to consider which data in a project are not of value (e.g. data from failed experiments), only have intermediate value (e.g. during data analysis) and which data should be preserved long-term, particularly if storage of large amounts of data is associated with significant costs. But also, do take into consideration that data not considered to be of any value for your present need, may turn out to be of value to others, or even to yourself, some time into the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, it can be worthwhile to consider which data in a project are not of value (e.g. data from failed experiments), only have intermediate value (e.g. during data analysis) and which data should be preserved long-term. This is particularly important if storage of large amounts of data is associated with significant costs. However, take into consideration that data not considered to be of any value for your present need, may turn out to be of value to others, or even to yourself, some time into the future.
```

### List datasets that you have archived or will archive

> Archiving of datasets includes the deposition of datasets in a research data archive, openly or with restricted access, and equipped with a persistent identifier (PID) as well as data that should be preserved but not published. As mentioned above, research data should be made available at an early stage, following the principles "as open as possible, as closed as necessary". Funders and research institutions may specify more exact guidelines for this. E.g. the guidelines from the Research Council of Norway says that data underlying scientific articles should be made accessible latest at publication. Other research data should be made accessible within a reasonable amount of time, and never later than three years after the project has ended [(Policy for open access to research data, 2017)](https://www.forskningsradet.no/contentassets/e4cd6d2c23cf49d4989bb10c5eea087a/the-research-council-of-norways-policy-for-open-access-to-research-data.pdf).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Archiving of datasets includes the deposition of datasets in a research data archive, openly or with restricted access, and equipped with a persistent identifier (PID) as well as data that should be preserved but not published. As mentioned above, research data should be made available at an early stage, following the principles "as open as possible, as closed as necessary". Funders and research institutions may specify more exact guidelines for this. E.g. the guidelines from the Research Council of Norway states that data underlying scientific articles should be made accessible latest at publication. Other research data should be made accessible within a reasonable amount of time, and never later than three years after the project has ended [(Policy for open access to research data, 2017)](https://www.forskningsradet.no/contentassets/e4cd6d2c23cf49d4989bb10c5eea087a/the-research-council-of-norways-policy-for-open-access-to-research-data.pdf).
```

Several of the sub-questions here let you refer to information in other chapters of your DMP or in external databases. Alternatively, it is always possible to enter a free-text answer.

#### Which metadata and documentation accompanies the dataset?
Explain to the best of your knowledge what metadata (what metadata standard) is used for your dataset. Here you may reuse information from the metadata standard question in the 'Data documentation' chapter.

Metadata is structured information about a dataset (or a document). _How to_ structure the information is done in various ways. Different metadata schemas are designed to capture the information, and such a schema is called a metadata standard. A metadata standard may be designed to suit a subject domain or a specific research area. There are, naturally, different information needs to describe a dataset with biological data, compared to a dataset which revolves on social sciences.

> A metadata schema may capture information by the use of controlled vocabularies. That way, information will be standardised and not be disrupted by different persons using different words or typology for same issues. Such a standardisation will preferably make use of ontologies from a subject domain, and metadata standards will thus often be subject specific. The use of controlled vocabularies and ontologies will increase the quality and findability of the archived data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A metadata schema may capture information by the use of controlled vocabularies to avoid ambiguity. That way, information will be standardised and not be disrupted by different persons using different words or typology for same issues. Such a standardisation will preferably make use of ontologies from a subject domain, avoiding misunderstandings if a term is used differently in different disciplines. The use of controlled vocabularies and ontologies will increase the quality and findability of the archived data.
```

Note that you here may reuse the answer from chapter VI: 'Data documentation during the project'.

> <!-- *write something about standards and use of ontologies* -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

#### Where has the data been archived?

> You should already have identified actual archives in the 'Identify archive(s)' question above. Thus, you may reuse the information you entered there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should already have identified suitable archives in the 'Identify archive(s)' question above. Thus, you may reuse the information you entered there.
```

> As mentioned above, archives to use should be 'trustworthy'. If you for some reason decide to use an archive not qualified as trustworthy, please consider closely what preservation policy the archive follows. Look for information on this in the 'About' section of the archive, and contact the archive if still in doubt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned above, archives to use should be 'trustworthy'. If you for some reason decide to use an archive not qualified as trustworthy, please consider closely what preservation policy the archive follows. Look for information on this in the 'About' section of the archive, and contact the archive if still in doubt.

In case data is not deposited to an archive but should be preserved locally beyond the project period, it is very important to define a preservation plan and who will be responsible.
```

> <!-- *write something about preservation strategy if you are NOT using a trustworthy repository* -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

#### Under what license will the dataset be made available?

> As mentioned above, the preferred choice is to archive data 'as open as possible', where open refers to both accessibility and reuseability. So, you should archive your data with an open license and thus as few restrictions as possible added. CC0 (or some other license corresponding to this) is often used for data. CC BY is a license also much used. CC BY requires referring to the author(s) of a dataset for its reuse. The BY clause may restrict the reuse, if someone wants to include large amounts of data, from numerous datasets in some analysis. In such a case referring correctly to all the authors may be an insurmountable challenge. And even if data is licensed CC0, referring correctly to the dataset, if practically possible, is what corresponds to good scientific norms. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned above, the preferred choice is to archive data 'as open as possible', where open refers to both accessibility and reusability. So, you should archive your data with an open license and thus as few restrictions as possible added. Even if in doubt if a dataset will be considered 'original' work, assigning a license is good practice to clarify reuse terms.\
See also the information on licensing in the chapter [Data documentation during the project](/pages/support_06_document#will-a-license-be-assigned-to-your-data-as-early-as-possible).

CC0 (No rights reserved) is a permissive license often used for data. CC BY (Attribution) is a license also much used. CC BY requires referring to the author(s) of a dataset for its reuse. Be ware that the BY clause may unintentionally restrict dataset reuse, if someone wants to include large amounts of data, from numerous datasets in some analysis. In such a case referring correctly to all the authors may be an insurmountable challenge. And even if data is licensed CC0, referring correctly to the dataset, if practically possible, is what corresponds to good scientific norms. 
```

For information on CC licenses, see [https://creativecommons.org/](https://creativecommons.org/).

> <!-- *write something about license selection* -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
